README.md, before:

# VoxRay Translate - Real-Time Voice Translation System

A real-time voice translation system built with FastAPI, Twilio, and OpenAI that enables seamless bidirectional voice conversations between speakers of different languages.

## Overview

**VoxRay Translate** is a sophisticated real-time translation system that bridges language barriers by providing instant voice-to-voice translation during phone calls. The system automatically creates translation sessions, manages WebSocket connections, and uses OpenAI's GPT-4 for high-quality translations.

## Architecture

### Core Components

1. **Translation Session Management**

   - `TranslationSession` class manages call pairs and WebSocket connections
   - Tracks source and target call SIDs, phone numbers, and languages
   - Maintains WebSocket connections for both callers

2. **WebSocket Endpoints**

   - `/ws/source/{session_id}` - Handles source caller websocket
   - `/ws/target/{session_id}` - Handles target callee websocket
   - Real-time bidirectional voice processing

3. **Voice Webhooks**

   - `/voice/source/{session_id}` - Outbound call handler for source language speaker
   - `/voice/target/{session_id}` - Outbound call handler for target language speaker

4. **Translation Engine**
   - Streaming translation using OpenAI GPT-4
   - Configurable source and target languages
   - Real-time token-by-token translation delivery

## How It Works

### Translation Process

```
Source Caller → WebSocket → Translation Engine → WebSocket → Target Callee
     ↑                                                            ↓
     ←───────── WebSocket ← Translation Engine ←────────      WebSocket
```

## Features

- **Bidirectional Translation**: Both parties can speak and hear in own language
- **Real-time Translation**: Instant translation with minimal delay
- **Session Management**: Robust session tracking with automatic cleanup
- **Configurable Languages**: Environment-based language configuration
- **Error Handling**: Comprehensive error handling and logging
- **Scalable Architecture**: FastAPI-based async architecture

### Supported Languages

ConversationRelay supports any language pair available in Twilio's Speech-to-Text (STT) and Text-to-Speech (TTS) services. The demo UI includes a selection of popular languages, though many more are supported:

- `en-US` English US
- `de-DE` German
- `es-ES` Spanish
- `fr-FR` French
- `it-IT` Italian
- `ro-RO` Romanian
- `pt-PT` Portuguese
- `el-GR` Greek
- `ja-JP` Japanese
- `zh-CN` Chinese Mandarin
- `ar-SA` Arabic

**Default Configuration:**

- **Source Language**: Defaults to `en-US` (English)
- **Target Language**: Defaults to `de-DE` (German)

## Installation and Setup

### 1. Install Dependencies:

```bash
uv sync
```

### 2. Configure Environment:

Create a .env file from the sample:

```bash
cp .env.sample .env    # Linux/Mac
copy .env.sample .env  # Windows
```

Then update the following variables with your actual values:

```env
# Twilio Configuration
TWILIO_ACCOUNT_SID=your_twilio_account_sid
TWILIO_AUTH_TOKEN=your_twilio_auth_token
TWILIO_PHONE_NUMBER=your_twilio_phone_number

# Target Configuration
TARGET_PHONE_NUMBER=target_phone_number

# OpenAI Configuration
OPENAI_API_KEY=your_openai_api_key

# Language Configuration (Optional)
SOURCE_LANGUAGE=en-US
TARGET_LANGUAGE=de-DE
```

### 3. Run the Application:

```bash
uv run  main.py
```

### 4. Configure Twilio Webhook:

Point your Twilio phone number webhook to `/voice`

## Current Status

**Phase 1**: ✅ Complete - Bidirectional real-time translation

- Source-to-target translation
- Target-to-source translation
- Session management
- WebSocket handling
- Environment-based configuration

## Future Enhancements

- **Multi-language Support**: Support for more than two languages per session
- **Conference Calls**: Multiple participants with different languages
- **Recording and Transcription**: Call recording with translated transcripts
- **Web Interface**: Browser-based translation interface
- **Mobile App**: Native mobile application

Commit message:

added ngrok to setup steps

README.md, after:

# VoxRay Translate - Real-Time Voice Translation System

A real-time voice translation system built with FastAPI, Twilio, and OpenAI that enables seamless bidirectional voice conversations between speakers of different languages.

## Overview

**VoxRay Translate** is a sophisticated real-time translation system that bridges language barriers by providing instant voice-to-voice translation during phone calls. The system automatically creates translation sessions, manages WebSocket connections, and uses OpenAI's GPT-4 for high-quality translations.

## Architecture

### Core Components

1. **Translation Session Management**

   - `TranslationSession` class manages call pairs and WebSocket connections
   - Tracks source and target call SIDs, phone numbers, and languages
   - Maintains WebSocket connections for both callers

2. **WebSocket Endpoints**

   - `/ws/source/{session_id}` - Handles source caller websocket
   - `/ws/target/{session_id}` - Handles target callee websocket
   - Real-time bidirectional voice processing

3. **Voice Webhooks**

   - `/voice/source/{session_id}` - Outbound call handler for source language speaker
   - `/voice/target/{session_id}` - Outbound call handler for target language speaker

4. **Translation Engine**
   - Streaming translation using OpenAI GPT-4
   - Configurable source and target languages
   - Real-time token-by-token translation delivery

## How It Works

### Translation Process

```
Source Caller → WebSocket → Translation Engine → WebSocket → Target Callee
     ↑                                                            ↓
     ←───────── WebSocket ← Translation Engine ←────────      WebSocket
```

## Features

- **Bidirectional Translation**: Both parties can speak and hear in own language
- **Real-time Translation**: Instant translation with minimal delay
- **Session Management**: Robust session tracking with automatic cleanup
- **Configurable Languages**: Environment-based language configuration
- **Error Handling**: Comprehensive error handling and logging
- **Scalable Architecture**: FastAPI-based async architecture

### Supported Languages

ConversationRelay supports any language pair available in Twilio's Speech-to-Text (STT) and Text-to-Speech (TTS) services. The demo UI includes a selection of popular languages, though many more are supported:

- `en-US` English US
- `de-DE` German
- `es-ES` Spanish
- `fr-FR` French
- `it-IT` Italian
- `ro-RO` Romanian
- `pt-PT` Portuguese
- `el-GR` Greek
- `ja-JP` Japanese
- `zh-CN` Chinese Mandarin
- `ar-SA` Arabic

**Default Configuration:**

- **Source Language**: Defaults to `en-US` (English)
- **Target Language**: Defaults to `de-DE` (German)

## Installation and Setup

### 1. Install Dependencies:

```bash
uv sync
```

### 2. Configure Environment:

Create a .env file from the sample:

```bash
cp .env.sample .env    # Linux/Mac
copy .env.sample .env  # Windows
```

Then update the following variables with your actual values:

```env
# Twilio Configuration
TWILIO_ACCOUNT_SID=your_twilio_account_sid
TWILIO_AUTH_TOKEN=your_twilio_auth_token
TWILIO_PHONE_NUMBER=your_twilio_phone_number

# Target Configuration
TARGET_PHONE_NUMBER=target_phone_number

# OpenAI Configuration
OPENAI_API_KEY=your_openai_api_key

# Language Configuration (Optional)
SOURCE_LANGUAGE=en-US
TARGET_LANGUAGE=de-DE
```

### 3. Configure Twilio Webhook:

Point your Twilio phone number webhook to `/voice`

### 6. Run the Application:

```bash
uv run  main.py
```

### 5. Run Ngrok:

```bash
ngrok http 8080
```

### 6. Open Your NGrok URL:

IMPORTANT: Open the public URL given by Ngrok. The demo will not function properly if you open http://localhost:8080

## Current Status

**Phase 1**: ✅ Complete - Bidirectional real-time translation

- Source-to-target translation
- Target-to-source translation
- Session management
- WebSocket handling
- Environment-based configuration

## Future Enhancements

- **Multi-language Support**: Support for more than two languages per session
- **Conference Calls**: Multiple participants with different languages
- **Recording and Transcription**: Call recording with translated transcripts
- **Web Interface**: Browser-based translation interface
- **Mobile App**: Native mobile application
